Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Sean Gallagher. He is
the Lillian and MRI Moss, Professor of Excellence at
the University of Memphis. His areas of research include
phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences. And today we're talking
about his latest book, The Self And Its Disorders.
So, Doctor Gallagher, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. Nice, nice to be
here.
So my first question would be, could you please
start by telling us what the book is actually
about? I mean, I'm going to read a quote
from your book here that I think I would
like. Uh IT'S very nice to get into what
the book is really about and I would like
you to comment on it. So there continues to
be a strong movement toward transforming psychiatry into neuropsychiatry.
So, would you like to comment on that and
tell us a little bit about what the book
is actually about?
OK, I think maybe uh that, that is uh
something like an overgeneralization because I mean, psychiatry is
a very broad um area of research and practice.
And uh I think maybe on the research side,
there is uh quite a move to uh towards
this kind of uh focus on the brain and
neural processes. Uh Whereas I'm not sure that's the
case. On the clinical side, I think on the
clinical side, people are much more pragmatic and trying
to, to work out the best uh approach to
a particular patient. Uh AND they have uh they
have ways of uh of, of doing that uh
different uh different therapeutic approaches and maybe have a,
a large tool bag of what they can do.
And uh they don't necessarily think of it just,
just purely in terms of brain processes. Although having
said that there are some people who still uh
focus on uh just getting the right medication and,
and then that's all we have to do because
that will fix the brain, so to speak. Um
So, uh the book itself is uh in a
certain way, an attempt to provide an alternative um
way of thinking about the subject, the the patient
um in, in terms of this notion of a
self pattern, which I think uh gives a uh
an alternative approach to, to thinking about things, especially
in the clinic, but also in, in the, on
the research side. Um And uh is uh I
think it's clear from the book that uh it's
very much inspired by embodied types of approaches to
cognition. So four e and inactive approaches especially
so, so I'm going to ask you about each
of the points you made there, particularly the kind
of approach you present in the book based on
for e cognition. But just before we get into
that, uh there's also another sort of comment you
make in the book about psychiatry generally, when you
say that psychiatry and science even more generally, is
not independent of epistemological and metaphysical assumption. So what
does that mean? And why does that matter?
Yes. Well, I think that uh it a lot
depends on how you think of the mind. You
know what, what your conception of the mind is.
And uh that involves not only understanding how, for
example, we might access the mind mind of others
as well as our own mind. Um And those
are epistemological questions. Uh BUT also the very nature
of what, what we consider to be the mind.
And uh those are metaphysical questions. Uh So if
we think of the mind simply as uh the
result of brain processes, and then that's going to
dictate a certain approach within psychiatry. Uh IF we
think of the mind uh more in terms of
embodied processes, uh extended processes, more in terms of
uh bodily and environmental factors uh playing a role
in the constitution of the mind. Uh Then we
have a different, a different concept and uh that
should have also implications for the practice of uh
psychiatry and how we do our research. Um So
those are issues having to do with epistemological and
metaphysical um concerns and uh uh I think uh
they, they play directly into uh questions about treatment
and uh and uh how we go about understanding
other people. Mhm
So tell us then about the four E cognition
approach and four E is stands for uh um
the mind being embodied, embedded, enacted and extended. So,
tell us about that and what are some of
the main ways it differs from other more dominant
approaches in psychiatry?
Yeah. So, um for, for, well, let me, let
me sort of say, first of all that, uh
there's no uh uh complete consensus about what we
mean by embodiment or uh precisely what the four
es uh there's no agreement, you know, among all
of the proponents of uh of four E cognition.
Um So, it's, it itself is a kind of
complex area of research um that still involves ongoing
debates about the role of the body, the role
of the environment and so forth. Um So having
said that, I think uh there is some agreement
that uh that what we're talking about here is
not just a set of brain processes, but that
although the brain is an important factor, an important
element in this story, uh we have to think
in terms of brain, body and environment as, as
a kind of uh unit of explanation. Uh And
that opening up of, of the uh the kind
of explanatory scope uh of what, what it might
be, in fact uh causing uh the uh the
condition that we're looking at, say in a psychiatric
condition that uh uh I think is useful. And
uh that's part of what I'm, I'm trying to
argue that we take a four E approach. Then
we're looking not just at what's going on in
the brain, not just what's going on in the
body, not just the environmental features, but um a
whole plurality of different factors that can enter in
and uh uh can be helpful in our attempt
to explain what, what might be going on in
any particular person.
So, something that you're also interested in is phenomenology
and referencing. Again, my first question, when I mentioned
neuropsychiatry at a certain point in the book, you
say that the psychiatry should go beyond neurobiological factors
and include phenomenological social existential dimensions. Uh What do
those dimensions correspond to exactly?
Well, uh I mean, uh the core idea in,
in the phenomenological approach to psychiatry is that the
uh one's experience really does matter first person experience,
um how we perceive the world, how we perceive
others, how we perceive ourselves. Um And our, our
experiential um the experiential components of, of uh our
uh our life. So uh taking that as something
important to consider um the, the relationship between um
our, our own experience and all kinds of other
things going on, right? Uh OUR ability to reflect,
for example, on our uh on our experience that
at least on some accounts that, that involves this
kind of existential component. Um And uh our ability
to relate to others may in fact be uh
shaped by how we experience uh our, our own
emotional life. Um So all of these factors are
uh interplay and all of these factors are uh
things uh where problems may develop. Uh WE might
develop some problem in emotion regulation and that's going
to affect our experience, which the phenomenon is trying
to understand. Uh And that's going to affect our
relations with others uh and our, our ability to
cope with various things that we encounter in the
world. Um So phenomenology is one way into uh
this kind of complex order of uh of the
of, of the individual self.
So I would like to ask you now about
some uh perhaps conceptual issues, theoretical issues in psychiatry
that even uh among psychiatrists who come from other,
let's say school of schools of thought also argue
among them. So, one of them is uh the
notion of symptom. So what does, what is the
symptom in psychiatry? Really?
OK. Um I think the, the notion of symptom
is um in some cases, it's something like a
uh the actual problem to be resolved or a
description of the problem. Uh And in in other
cases, it's taken to be uh a sign that
uh motivates us to look elsewhere for the problem.
Say. Um So, for example, if you, if you
think of anxiety, um then uh is anxiety the
problem um that, that someone is suffering from or
is it the uh is it the symptom of
something else? Um And we can always ask, uh
you know, what causes the symptom. Um uh And
then the question is, does that, you know, to
talk about just, just to talk about symptoms? Uh
IS that sufficient or do we have to look
uh further for some kind of uh causal factors
that will explain why the person is experiencing something
the way they are experiencing it. Um So, uh
the, there is a, you know, the, uh a
network theory um that basically focuses on symptoms, uh
talk, talking about a network of symptoms that will
define the disorder. Um And one could ask, does
that go deep enough? And, and there are debates
about this about to what extent we need to
have something like a mechanistic explanation of what's going
on uh or causal um uh explanation. Um So,
if we think of uh the, the problem at
the level of sort of the uh uh the,
the causal factors, uh then um that seems to
go just beyond symptoms, all those symptoms themselves can
have uh uh uh a kind of uh causal
effect uh kind of looping back, you know, if,
if our symptom um has something to do with
um the stress we're experiencing and we start to
feel anxiety that anxiety will then feed back into
itself and uh that will, will lead to uh
even uh maybe further symptoms like insomnia or, or
whatever. Um So I guess, uh it's, uh I
guess I would just say it's very complex, what
a, what a symptom is, what role it plays
in uh in uh in psychiatry. And there are
different, different views about that.
And what about the notion of mental disorder? Uh
What uh I mean, uh o of sure, of
course, uh asking you what it means. Uh IF
I ask different psychiatrists, I know that they would
give me different answers because I've actually done that
on the show before. But uh how important do
you think it is to uh understand or approach
this notion of mental disorder in psychiatry?
Yeah. So, um I, I use the term uh
and the idea of a disorder, I mean, literally
a disorder uh means that something that should be
ordered is no longer ordered. Um And of course,
I'm thinking of this. Uh And, and you're absolutely
right that there are debates within psychiatry about now,
you know how we should think about a mental
disorder or what exactly it is. Uh I think
of it as a, a disorder of the self
pattern, right? So I'm using this pattern theory approach.
Uh It's a disorder of the self pattern. You
normally the, the uh the self pattern is and
ordering of different factors. And the question, I guess
the real question is what, you know, how do
you judge something uh to be, say a, a
disorder rather than a kind of ordinary ordering? And
uh it seems to me that the, the ultimate
uh sort of uh criterion here is whether the
person uh is experiencing a kind of suffering. So
I think I would tie disorder to uh the
idea of suffering. Uh And uh if you know,
whatever the, the condition might be, if there's suffering
involved, then we would say something is disordered, something
needs to be set, right? Um What, what exactly
that means setting something right is of course, then
open again to debate. But, but if, if um
if you can define it in terms of rel
the relief of suffering, then, then you're moving in
the right direction. It seems to me.
So I've asked you about symptoms about mental disorders.
And according to at least the current neurology or
the classification of psychiatric disorders that we have in
the DS M and elsewhere, there's a lots of
overlap uh between different disorders in terms of the
symptoms that, that they share. What does that tell
us if anything
we uh yes. Well, this uh the similarity of
symptoms across different disorders. This has to do with
comorbidity um that uh you know, patients can suffer
all kinds of things that don't neatly fall into
the kind of uh categories or classifications um of,
of uh the, you know, typical psychiatric disorders. Um
So, uh that, that of course, complicates things uh
for uh for psychiatry. Um But if, if your
main concern is to, to make sure that we
have the right classification um in order to determine
treatment, for example, um then yeah, then the the
the kind of similarity of symptoms and the comorbidities
are really complicating factors. If on the other hand,
you're focused on the patient, on or on, on
the person uh and asking about the particular order
of various factors that constitute the self pattern. Um
Then it, it doesn't seem to be so much
of a problem. Um The, you know, we could
just say, well, this, this particular person uh is
manifesting um uh the uh uh this particular mix
of uh of symptoms. Uh uh AND well, it
might be difficult to classify them, but nonetheless, this
is what the person is suffering. So let's let's
focus on that and simply work out some kind
of therapeutic uh approach that would, that will hopefully
work. Um So I think it's not so much
uh a problem in uh for, for the kind
of approach that I'm proposing. Um IT does seem
to be a problem when you're trying to really
be rigid about your classifications. Mhm
So, uh how would the classification of psychiatric disorders
look like uh within the framework you present in
the book.
Yeah. Um, WELL, I suppose that I would say
that, um, the, the, uh, in the notion of
self pattern, it's, uh again, not so important to,
uh, to, to make sure that the classification is,
is uh uh correct. There might be other reasons
why you, you'd want to have the correct classification
and that might have to do with the whole
system uh of, you know, how people are, uh
are, are treated uh uh within certain practices and
institutions and how medical research is funded and, and
so forth and so on. Uh So there might
be practical reasons for that, but in terms of,
um especially in terms of clinical practice, um I
don't think that matters as much uh still uh
in, in terms of the uh the self pattern.
Um I it's, it's not ever going to be,
you know, merely one thing that goes wrong. Uh
It's, it's going to be a, uh uh a,
a uh uh uh uh well, it's going to
be a number of different factors that are going
to be involved um, and trying to get straight
about exactly what those factors are and how they
are uh disordered, let's say, uh is uh part
of what you're, what you're aiming at, I think
in, in the clinical practice. Mhm.
So, uh I'm going to ask you about the
self, self pattern and all of those notions that
you also explore in the book. But just before
that, just to cover uh one particular kind of
approach that sometimes people have to mental disorder. There
are some people that say, or claim that mental
disorder is nothing but a social construct or that
is it is merely a social construct. Uh What
do you make of that claim?
Yeah. So I I would take that to be
something of a reductionist approach. Uh Any, any approach
that just says uh oh mental disorder is just
this one thing, one thing goes wrong or, or,
or there's one area that we just have to
consider in order to explain everything. Now, that could
be, it's, it's a matter of just, just the
brain or it's a matter of just social relations.
Um And it's totally socially constructed. Um I think
that what, what I'm arguing in the book is
that, that, that would uh uh in fact be
a kind of reductionist view and I'm arguing for
a, a non reductionist view which says, uh it's
always going to involve um more than one thing.
So the, the notion of the self pattern is
such that if you, if you um if you
change or intervene on one aspect and that, that
uh does some kind of, that involves some kind
of change in that aspect, a certain point uh
uh at a certain uh threshold that's going to
also have an effect upon other aspects. Uh So
it's never just a simple um one item going
wrong. But it's rather, uh you, one has to
look at the whole pattern to see uh what
has shifted and what has changed be because of
a particular thing. It might be, uh, that, of
course, you have to look in a particular uh
at a particular element in order to sort of
see that as the primary issue that needs to
be addressed. But there might be uh a number
of different ways of addressing that uh in, in
the kind of clinical practice.
Um What do you mean by self in your
book? Be I'm asking you this because there are
different notions of self out there uh in philosophy
of mind, for example, in neuroscience, psychology and elsewhere,
there are people that say for example, or claim
that the self is just again a social construct.
Other people say that it's the product of a
narrative of some sort. Others say that it is
very minimal and it lasts for, I don't know
a few seconds and then another self comes online
or something along those lines and other people even
link it to or try to link it to
some neuronal processes. So uh what is your view
of it?
Yeah. So the I guess the the core a
claim in the book is uh is tied to
this notion of self pattern. So what I would
say is the self just is a pattern, a
pattern of different elements. And I think that uh
the elements uh include uh a lot of different
things, including embodied processes, um experiential processes, affected processes,
social processes and so forth and so on. Um
So, all of these factors uh and all of
these processes uh play a role in um in,
in uh um yeah, producing a, a kind of
pattern which I would say that's the self is
a, it's not any one of those processes. Um
But it's the pattern that somehow or other um
pulls these processes together in some way. Uh So
that's uh my conception of the self just is,
is that, that it is, in fact, uh a
self pattern. It's a pluralist conception. I, I think
you can find the roots of it in people
like William James. Um um AND uh Ulrich Nicer.
Um So I point to them as, as having
pluralist conceptions of the South. And I think the
pattern theory in the South is a pluralist uh
conception which doesn't mean that there are many selves,
but there are many aspects that make up the
pattern, which is the self.
And when it comes to these different aspects or
different factors that play a role in generating the
self, they relate to one another in a, in
a dynamical way.
Correct. Yeah, that's uh that's what I, I would
want to say that. Um And, and there are,
have been some uh uh people who have said,
look this, this looks just like a list of
things that you've and gathered together. Uh And uh
I want to say, well, yes. OK. It's a
list of things but these, these processes are as
processes, they are dynamically related to one another. So
uh it's, you can't really pull apart uh social
aspects and the experiential or the affective or the
embodied. These are all meshed in some way uh
in, in a pattern that I typically characterize as
a, a dynamical gestalt. So there's a, a pattern
as a whole which uh is really constituted by
the various elements, processes, factors, whatever word you that
seems appropriate. Uh And uh these uh the, the
mesh of those factors uh really depend upon dynamical
causal relations among them.
And how do you study or what is your
proposal when it comes to how we could study
the self pattern dynamics?
Yeah. So I there's a chapter in the book
where I uh I outline a particular threefold method
um that uh would allow us to, to study.
Um That's, that's definitely one answer to the, the
kind of question you're asking. And there's another one
that has to do with narrative. But uh in
terms of the threefold uh approach, uh I think
of this more in terms of research than in
terms of the clinical. So if we think of
uh a distinction between psychiatric research uh on the
one hand and uh psychiatric clinical practice on the
other, I would say that this threefold approach is
more on the research side. And the narrative approach
is probably more on the clinical side. The threefold
approach involves really what I've done is I borrowed
quite, quite a bit from different disciplines. Um So
I borrowed uh the notion of uh what is
called the meshed architecture uh from uh performance studies
where the question is, you know, how do we
explain the relationship between say certain cognitive elements uh
and a certain embodied elements in performance, performance that
might be um expert performance or skilled performance in
the performing arts, for example. Um And uh there,
I, I suggested that uh it's not just cognitive
and it's not just bodily uh you know, motor
control processes, but also social aspects, normative factors come
into play. And so you can build up a,
an architecture um um which tries to explain all
of the different elements that might be involved and
how they might mesh together um to, to actually
test empirically um that kind of conception. Um I
then appeal to James Woodward's uh notion of interventionist
causality. Uh And the idea that you can intervene
on any one of those factors and then see
how all of the other factors uh adjust or
are affected by that intervention in order to test
for the causal, I would say the dynamical relations
between those factors. Um And uh and finally, I
borrow from Scott Kelso, uh his notion of coordinations
dynamics, which really gets into the nitty gritty details
of the dynamics uh to try to show uh
precisely how these things work and how they're related
to one another. And what other effects specifically nonlinear
type effects that um a change might have on
a variety of different factors. So if we think
of a self as a self pattern, which is
composed of different processes and factors, one can use
this kind of threefold approach in order to uh
at least study and try to understand the the
possible variations within self patterns that some of which
might in fact be pathological. Um So that would
be uh it seems to me um well, an
approach that would be useful in research. Mhm
uh But when it comes to how we would
approach each different kind of psychopathology or each different,
let's say clinical case. Um I mean, uh would,
is it the case that all of these different
factors that you mentioned in the book that uh
relate to one another dynamically would always play a
role in all of them? Or would we need
to determine in each case which ones would be
relevant?
Uh I think the latter, I mean, I think
uh each case would be different. And uh the,
I think the usefulness of the self pattern idea
in the clinical setting is that it, it really
gives the clinician um psychologist or psychiatrist uh something
uh uh to use uh to, to be able
to sort of ask, you know, what, what exactly
is going on with this patient. Uh And let's
look at the various aspects of the self pattern
and see if we can uh give a, a
description of uh this particular person's uh problems uh
in, in those terms. And then once, if we
can, if we can do that, it might be
that uh some, some of those features are simply
uh they, they look like the the primary problem.
And, and then we can try to address those,
those features knowing of course, that by addressing one
feature, one process in the self pattern, it's going
to have an effect on the, on the rest
as well. So we look there as well. So
it's uh I think it's uh maybe a useful
tool. I hope it's a useful tool for um
clinicians to, to use that, that, that wouldn't necessarily
entail that whole kind of a threefold uh methodology
that I I outlined uh that that would be
again more for research on the clinical side. They
uh it's it's very uh useful to uh to
think about this in terms of the narrative and
how um narrative is one element of the self
pattern. So uh that's, that's something that uh one
can look at, but it, it's also the case
that narrative uh I claim narrative reflects all of
the other aspects of the self pattern. Uh So
that one can use kind of uh as a
as a kind of tool uh narrative as a
way into seeing exactly how things are, are arranged
or disarranged within the salt powder.
Another concept I would like to ask you about
is the concept of self narrative. So what is
it? And according to the framework you present in
your book, how would it relate to pathological experiences?
Yeah. So as I, as I, as I said,
it's um it, I take the, the narrative aspect
of the uh self pattern to be one element.
It's, it's very closely related to uh our ability
to reflect on our life. So, reflection and narrative
kind of go hand in hand. And um self
narrative is uh simply the ability of the, the
person to say um you know, what uh what
their life is like, uh what it has been
like, how they relate to other people, um what
they're doing with respect to their work environment. Um
All, all kinds of different things come into our
self narratives. Um And, and so what we're finding
in that self narrative is something a reflect uh
of a reflection of how the person is experiencing
um life, uh what they're, you know, whether they're
having any kind of physical uh problems, you know,
so that would be the embodiment factor, what their,
what their feelings or emotions are like. Uh That
would be an effective uh issue, uh how they
relate to other people. Um HOW they, the, you
know what they think about their living conditions, their
work conditions. So the environment kind of comes into
this normative factors about how they're supposed to be
behaving within certain environments. Um So there's a lot
there to explore. So one can explore through the
self narrative, all of these other factors. And then
uh one can, one can then uh see in
what sense there is some problem, uh some suffering
that needs to be addressed. Uh And uh in
that respect, then define something uh like a uh
a pathological case. The there is a lot of
research uh on self narratives in various conditions. Uh
uh So, uh people have as, as I put
it in the uh in the book, uh the
self narrative can be almost like a fingerprint, a
test of uh whether the content and or the
structure of the narrative gives us uh any kind
of sign of whether or not we're, we're dealing
with a case of schizophrenia versus depression uh or
uh or any other kind of um uh condition.
Uh So, a and, but that again goes on
to the research side and it's uh that kind
of analysis of is on one hand, it can
be se semantic uh in terms of the content
of what the person is saying. We also uh
can look at the form uh the syntactical structure
of the narrative that may uh be typical for
a particular condition that's not necessarily something that can
be looked at uh by the clinician in a,
in an easy way. But again, for research that
could, that could serve us. Uh Yeah. So narrative
uh I think it seems to me uh self
narrative plays uh an interesting role here uh that
uh opens up the possibility of analysis uh for
uh for this particular co uh patient.
Uh But just to illustrate what we're talking about
here with a particular example of a condition. Uh
HOW does self narrative play out or how does
it uh it's disintegration, let's say, play out in
the case of schizophrenia, for example.
Yeah. Well, as I say, there are some researchers
who have looked specifically at narratives uh um uh
uh generated by uh people who are experiencing uh
schizophrenia. And so what are they looking at? They,
they may be looking uh uh I get at
some of those syntactical features but they uh that's
some more technical type of uh investigation. But there
might be other things that um show something like
uh a uh a reduced uh reference to uh
the first person pronoun um a reduced uh uh
you know, reference to self problems with self agency.
Um And uh maybe problems with dissociation from their
body. Um So, there are all kinds of cues
here. Uh And, and whether, you know, to what
extent they fit with a, a diagnosis of schizophrenia
as opposed to borderline personality disorder, that, that, of
course, is not easy. But that's, that's why the
psychiatrist uh uh is, is required. And uh they,
they have training and expertise uh in this. Uh
So anyway, it seems to me that the, it's
the self narrative that can tell us something about
just those uh those features that might be uh
considered symptoms or uh clues to what precisely is
going on with that the patient.
So at a certain point there, you use the
term agency. And in the book, you talk about
the experiences of agency and ownership as elements in
the phenomenology of the self pattern. So, um
what
role
do
they play here exactly?
OK. Well, the the notion of a sense of
agency or a sense of ownership uh originally, uh
the idea was that these are experiential uh aspects.
So they belong to that experiential part of the
self pattern. Um But I think it's much more
complex than that since uh and this, this again,
sort of is uh supportive of the idea that
the self pattern uh is not just, you know,
a collection of individual factors, but in fact, is,
you know, uh consists of dynamical relations among these
factors. So if, if something like um a as
you find in schizophrenic delusions, for example, something like
um a problem with the sense of agency develops
at that kind of basic experiential level. So this
is uh a kind of anomalous experience that the
schizophrenic might be having. Um THAT it doesn't stop
there because um that can enter into the narrative
um that can enter into the reflective uh uh
uh processes that the, the patient might uh start
to employ thinking about what, you know, what is
exactly going on with uh with this experience. So
how can I explain it uh that can sort
of then feed into a more delusional um uh
experience and uh the, you know, the sense of
agency. If you, if you look closely at it,
it, it also involves social relations. Uh YOU know,
it's, it's often tied to distinctions between self and
other. Am I the one acting or is the
other person doing this? Uh And so it, there's
a social dimension, intersubject of uh uh relations are
sort of at stake sometimes in this. So then
we find again and something like schizophrenic uh schizophrenia
that yeah, social factors also are disrupted. Uh So
it's not just experiential, it's not just, you know
what the phenomenological psychologists would say that it's just
uh a minimal self or minimal self experience, but
in fact, it involves other people. It involves our
experience of the world. Uh It can involve our,
our body and uh and so forth and so
on. So it then becomes this even this. If
you trace out the sense of agency, it becomes
a very complex thing spread over all of the
other factors of, of the self uh pattern.
And another concept that is important here is autonomy.
So where is autonomy? And uh why does it
matter in the context of mental disorder?
Yeah. Uh I think there is a several different
ways to think about autonomy in this context. Uh
First of all, I, I've uh I'm very much
influenced here when I think of autonomy, I'm influenced
by some feminist thought uh that um you know,
specifies that autonomy is not just this kind of
individual characteristic of uh a single person. Uh But
rather it has to do with our social relations,
our intersubject relations, especially. So it's a relational notion
of autonomy that I'm I'm dealing with in the
book. Uh So I, but I take that uh
from uh well, we find that in critical phenomenology
and feminist thinkers. Uh So assuming, assuming that, assuming
that autonomy is, in fact um uh relational uh
then of course, things can go wrong um with
our social relations. Um And uh things can go
wrong with all the other aspects of the self
pattern as well that can interfere uh with our
autonomy. One way, another way to think about it
is in terms of uh affordances. Um And I
do a little bit of uh this type of
analysis in the book where the idea is that
pathological uh conditions may in fact uh um uh
lead to a disruption of uh uh our normal
affordances in life that we might feel that we
cannot engage with others or we cannot engage with
the world. Uh Or we feel anxious about all
of those things. So if the, the, you might
say the, the uh the level of affordances that
are available to us uh are diminished. Uh And
I think that suggests that uh in, in fact,
we lose some autonomy, that our autonomy diminishes as
well. Uh And if you think that autonomy is
important, which uh most theorists do, then uh the
diminishment of autonomy. However, we understand that uh it
could be very much a part of something like
a psychopathology.
So I would like to ask you now about
some the uh therapeutic approaches and particular kinds of
technologies that some people propose or are already used
to address uh psychopathology or try to try to
treat it. So, what do you make of uh
is uh claims that people make about how we
could address psychopathology targeting directly the brain itself? For
ex for example, sometimes people uh talk about uh
doing some human announcement through applications that would target
the brain. Since your approach here in the book
is about the self pattern as distributed across brain
body and environment. What do you make of those
kinds of proposals?
Right. I think. So, the um I would say
that one can intervene uh on um the self
pattern in a variety of ways in one way
could be by an intervention on the brain. Um
UNDERSTANDING that if through medication or deep brain stimulation.
We affect a change in the dynamics of uh
the brain that's going to have an effect on
the body and our experience of the environment. And
that's that therefore is going to have an effect
on these other aspects of the self pattern. So
again, I would just say we, we need to
take a wide perspective on uh just these kinds
of therapies. I mean, there there are many different
therapies, we can intervene, let's say on a self
pattern in a variety of different ways. One way
could be to intervene um in terms of medication,
uh changing brain chemistry uh or changing the dynamics
in the brain with uh deep brain stimulation or
something like that. Um But all of that is
a kind of intervention that still has an effect
upon the rest of the self pattern. Uh So
it, it, it might work the best in some
cases and in other cases, it might not work
at all. And we don't have a really good
understanding of, of how medication, for example works. Uh
You know, we, we know sometimes it works and
sometimes it doesn't, why is that? We're not quite
sure. Uh So, um it's, it's not necessarily always
the best solution. Uh And uh we have to
be aware of that
on the topic of technology. Something that I found
really interesting in your book is that at a
certain point you talk about A E I. So
I, in what ways do you relate A I
or the use of A I to the kinds
of topics you explore in the book, particularly when
it comes to how it might change the self
pattern.
Yeah. So there, uh you know, I have a
chapter on this. Uh ALSO there are artificial intelligence,
um enhanced therapies, uh let's say, uh or um
the use of artificial intelligence and some therapeutic tools.
And uh you, you can think of, there's a,
an old uh uh idea of the chat box
of Eliza that, you know, goes back, I think
to the seventies or something. Um They, uh and
in fact, you know, if you, it's a very
simple, a very simple program where you uh Eliza
is a program that simply kind of repeats what
you say. If you say, you know, I'm having
trouble sleeping. Eliza will say, well, tell me about
your trouble sleeping and it's not like they, there's
anything there except a kind of mirroring of what
you're saying, but it turns out that it turn
that some patients find this actually therapeutic, that they're
at least getting to talk about their problems. Uh
And, and that might itself be uh what's going
on there. And now more recently, um these chat
boxes have become pretty sophisticated uh using, you know,
recent uh uh developments in artificial intelligence. So, is
this something uh you know, people are asking, you
know, is this something we, we can use uh
um uh more uh pervasively in terms of treatment.
Uh And uh again, I would say it could
be an intervention that might be very helpful in
some cases and maybe it doesn't work at all
in other cases. So there is this, you know,
I, I discussed this problem in Borderline Personality Disorder
um that uh that some, uh some people uh
with uh this condition might find it difficult to
relate to the, the therapist in a face to
face kind of relationship, but might not find it
difficult at all to relate to a chat box.
And so for, for that person, uh if it's
an issue having to do with trust or, or
whatever, it might be that the chat box could,
could actually function pretty well. And if it's enhanced
by artificial intelligence, then that might be even even
better. So again, it's uh it's another kind of
uh therapeutic therapeutic approach that that could have um
good applications. Um BUT not necessarily the right one
for every condition.
So another sort of uh therapeutic approach that you
talk about in the book, I is the one
that is based on mindfulness and other related uh
meditative approaches, let's say so. But before we get
into the psychiatry of it, let's say, uh i
it's interesting because in the book, you talk about
the self self pattern uh since mindfulness is originally
based on Buddhism, uh what do you make of
the kinds of approaches that the Buddhists tend to
have to the self. And do, do you think
that it, there could be any sort of conflict
between that and uh the framework you present in
the book or not?
Uh OK. Yeah. Thanks for that question. It's uh
it's good. First of all, I, I guess I
would say that there's no one unified uh view
of the self in Buddhism. Uh The, you know,
Buddhism is a very old tradition with huge number
of debates uh ongoing uh and traditional debates as
well as ongoing debates about what the, what, what
we mean by the self and, and how we
can think of it and the idea of there
being no self uh as well. Um So, yeah,
so it's uh it's difficult to speak just of
the Buddhist conception of the self. Um But uh
having said that there are definitely certain arguments uh
within the contemplative community uh that uh you know,
borrow, borrow heavily from uh uh borrows heavily from
Buddhism um about, you know, at attaining AAA non
dual state through meditation practice, uh a state where
the self is very much diminished and perhaps at
the end disappears if, if you become expert at
it. Um Now, the, the question there is uh
what exactly is meant by the self. Uh And
uh you know, how does it relate to the
notion of the self pattern? Uh So I, I
have actually worked on this. Um II I talk
about a little bit within the uh within the
book, but there are several other papers that I've
been co-authored on uh uh with uh a large
group of, of um people in uh who, who
know Buddhism better than I do. Uh So Buddhist
scholars uh also neuroscientists, psychologists in this group. And
we have, we have talked about um the idea
that uh yeah, there is a kind of consistency
between certain Buddhist doctrines and the notion of the
self pattern. The idea that the, that what we
call the self is made up of different attributes
um uh different processes. Uh AND that no one
process uh is equivalent to the self. So th
this again, kind of leaves it open to the
idea that the self is something like a pattern.
There's no one element that is equivalent to the
self. And this, the, the pattern itself is uh
what is important uh in within the pattern. There
are certain elements of the pattern that if they
are emphasized or focused upon, they might lead to
a kind of rigidity, uh rigidity within the self
pattern. And this could become pathological. So I think
one of the, one of the really important things
that uh the, the Buddhist or the meditation tradition
gives us is this idea that we can address
um the rigidity problem that we can through a
kind of meditation practices, uh introduce some more flexibility,
more flex flexibility into the self pattern. And this
could in fact be therapeutic uh to relieve a
kind of pathological rigidity that might might be uh
at issue. And if, if that's the case, then
uh meditation could be a useful uh therapeutic uh
approach.
Uh But uh currently, what do we know about
the therapeutic effects of mindfulness? I mean, are they
always positive or is it that sometimes it might
have potential adverse effects?
Yes, there is a, a literature, a growing literature,
I think on the possibility that mindfulness could have
potential adverse effects, as you say so, and then,
uh but then I think that could probably be
said about any therapy that it could take you,
you know, a little bit too far in some
direction. Um So, uh I think that just, that
just says, uh we have to be careful about
that. And again, this is why it's important. I
mean, the, the Buddhist tradition always says it's important
to have a teacher. Uh I think in this
context, it's important to have a trained psychiatrist involved
uh and not just practice this on your own.
Um And uh it's, it's then, you know, the
skill of the psychiatrist and the art of the
practice that will be able to uh help us
determine whether or not this is going too far,
whether it's being beneficial, whether we're getting flexibility, whether
we're cutting down on rigidity and so forth. So
that's, that's part of the practice. Yes.
So one last topic that is also the last
one you explore in your, in your book that
I would like to ask you about has to
do with things like torture, solitary confinement, uh and
cruelty. So, uh first of all, why did you
include a chapter on those topics in your book?
In what ways do they relate to the exploration
you make of things like the self and the
self pattern uh in the book?
OK. Um Yeah, I mean, they relate in, in
terms of uh uh causes of trauma and uh
of course, trauma is something that can lead uh
to psychopathological experience and conditions. Um So tor uh
you know, to bodily torture uh isn't just bodily,
it's psychological, it's uh it, I would say, you
know, it will have an effect on all those
different elements of the self pattern. And uh in
a similar fashion, uh solitary confinement has been shown,
I mean, there's been empirical work to show the
damage that it can cause to the individual. And
it turns out that if you sort of look
at all of the different aspects that uh are,
are damaged, uh you can go right through the
um all of the elements of, you know, what
I consider to be the self pattern and see
that it has an effect on all of them,
you know, embodiment one's effective life one's and of
course what it is, it's a, it's a taking
away the intersubject social aspect, you know, it's saying,
right, solitary confinement, we, you're not going to be
able to interact with anybody. And that, that, that
gives you a clear idea of what, what the
main problem is, but it turns out that take
away social relations and in some cases that really
has a profound effect on all of the other
factors and people break down in a completely uh
a completely uh uh serious way uh in terms
of their, their life, um they can, they can
recover from this. Uh But uh nonetheless, uh it's
a huge amount of suffering. So there's been uh
debates about this, of course, in the legal profession
as well, but a lot of it really is
uh uh tuned to the psychological effects uh and
the effects on the, the person more generally. Mhm
uh But how do you approach drama within the
framework you adopt in the book? What does drama
mean? Exactly?
Well, I think uh i it seems to me
that trauma is sort of at the extreme of
uh of conditions that uh it like a tr
a traumatic incident will intervene at some on some
part of the self pattern and then cause of
a very serious disruption. And it could be a
very explicit type of disruption where it's quite apparent.
And that that happens, for example, in solitary confinement,
uh in many cases that it's really a complete
breakdown. I uh immediate, not immediately but, you know,
over a short course of time, um, uh, or
torture could have certainly, uh, worked that way as
well. Um, BUT also there are long term effects.
Um, AND it might be more subtle, it might
be more implicit uh, trauma, uh, has a, a
long life, let's say. Uh And uh that kind
of problem that someone might, might develop within the,
the organization of their self pattern, might be hidden
away for a while and only come out at
certain points and under certain conditions. So there are
different ways uh we could think of trauma and
how it has an effect upon the self pattern.
Um But uh it's, I think it's a really
an important topic to, to take a look at.
So my last question and related to the two
issues surrounding torture and solitary confinement, for example, uh
what is uh cruelty? Because uh usually when it,
we talk about cruelty, we put it in uh
moral terms. But in this context of psychiatry and
uh psychiatric approaches to the mind, uh how would
you talk about cruelty?
Mm. That's a great question. I mean, in, in
the book, I really, um think about it in
terms of the legal definition. Mhm. Uh So in
the US anyway, it's uh uh there's this phrase
about cruel and unusual punishment and the question is,
uh of course, torture would be something like cruel
and unusual punishment. Question about solitary confinement. Some people
say it is. Some people argue it's not uh
but part of the argument has to do with
the notion of cruelty. Exactly. How do you define
cruelty? And uh then you, you find in the
legal uh uh literature that there is no uh
there's no consensus there about what we call uh
cruel punishment. So I think uh that's, that's a
question that uh in the legal profession is open.
But if you look at the empirical data, if
you look at the empirical uh studies of something
like solitary confinement, and if you, if you can
say yes, well, in solitary confinement, the whole, the
self pattern starts to discrim uh to uh uh
yeah, to be totally disrupted. Um AND leading to
all kinds of problems and I would say, leading
to all kinds of suffering for that individual. Um
If the suffering is of such a high degree,
then I, I can say, then we could say
that, well, that's cruel. That would be a, a
way to characterize. I think it's better to say,
characterized than define. Um But a way to characterize
uh cruelty, trying to get a good definition of
it is going to be difficult just because we're
talking about different disciplines. Uh AND uh and debates
within each of those disciplines. Uh But to characterize
it, I think, uh you know, you know, it,
when you see it, if, if there's a complete
breakdown and a huge amount of suffering on the
part of the person. Then that has to be
uh a way to talk about the cruelty involved.
So the book is again the self and its
disorders. I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview and Doctor Gallagher. Uh Just
before we go apart from the book, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
or your work on the internet?
Oh, sure. They can uh Google Google me or,
you know, look me up on the internet. Uh
I have a website um um so they could,
they won't be able to find that. Uh I
have an academia website also if they're interested in
publications and research gate uh website as well. So,
uh there's, there's a number of places where you
can find uh my work and uh my publications
and uh I think a good number of them
are available uh free. So it's uh you don't
have to uh necessarily even go, go to your
library. You can get it directly at the internet.
So, Doctor Gallagher, thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you.
Ok. Thank you. Uh VERY much Ricardo. It's been,
yeah, it's been fun. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte bli Nicole Barba, Adam hunt Pavlo
Stassi, Nale Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
Y. Polton John Barboza Julian Price. Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franka, La Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Oin
David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry Dey
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica week in the B brand
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentin Steinman,
Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Albert Liam. Dan Biar.
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller, Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for
all.